foreign all that's required is to not
have the money be personal
right so you don't actually have to see
it as a game you don't actually have to
see it as a means to an end all that's
really required is like oh the money
isn't personal
you just have to see yourself as human
beyond the money and then money as a way
of flowing very differently in people's
lives
welcome to the art of accomplishment
where we explore how deepening
connection with ourselves and others
leads to creating the life we want with
enjoyment and ease I'm Brett Kistler
here today with my co-host Joe Hudson
foreign
welcome back everybody to our topic on
money and now we're going to get to the
second half of this discussion on the
belief that money is bad
so Joe what makes it that people develop
this belief that money is bad or evil
yeah
um what I typically notice is that money
is bad
comes because somebody felt that money
hurt them
right so
maybe they had a parent who cared more
about money than they it felt like the
parent cared more about money than they
did about time with the kid or
that somebody with money did something
bad or that somebody uh with wealth did
something that made them feel
less than also we there are certain
people that have perspectives internal
perspectives that when something makes
them feel bad they attack
right that's the way their personality
system works and so
you know just being observing great
wealth and the way that great wealth
moves can make people feel like oh like
if they have that moment of insecurity
or that moment of like oh I'm not good
enough then their natural response might
be to attack the way that their
personality works and so for I think all
of those reasons people think that money
is bad and I mean you can see it all
over our society you want to like you'll
if you just start saying how people with
a lot of money are bad you'll start
getting a following
so it's it's a fascinating thing but
it's often not just even people with a
lot of money it's just money you know
the system sucks the
what an [__] he drives a 120 000 car
right it's just like there's this whole
set of judgments that come along with
money and I think they're usually some
reflection or some sort of projection of
our own relationship with
money and or ourselves or or like I said
earlier
with our parents or authority figures or
something like that what you were saying
there was like the 120 000 car like
money can point at glaring inequalities
in all the things that money can be a
surrogate for like you might see
somebody with a lot of money and they're
getting a lot of affection from people
and a lot of attention because they have
money
and so then
that makes you feel your lack of
affection and attention
and maybe in the opposite framing of
what we were talking about in the first
half
instead of buying into it and being like
you know what I need I need more money
and then people will love me you instead
just say well [__] that
I don't want to play that game
so then money becomes this like lava
that you don't want to touch yeah let's
take a look at like that the person and
the let's call it a 250 000 car there's
a person drive around in 250 000 car
now some group of people are going to be
like that guy is a just a good person
cool like they've accomplished something
I like that
I like him or her and some people are
going to be like what a douchebag you
know like whatever a whole bunch of you
know greedy selfish what happens to our
whole system if we just see the person
as a person
they are neither good nor bad
they are neither insecure more insecure
less insecure than all the rest of us
so they're just a human being
and a flawed like all of us and healthy
like all of us and that we can't even
know do we know does the person in the
car is that do they have that car
because that's what their job requires
of them because they need to exude
status are they doing it because they're
trying to get their mom's love are they
doing it because
uh they just really love it's just their
passion is sports cars and or their
passion is just really well made
Machinery or
or really complex Machinery like what we
don't even know we don't even know
what's happening for that person and so
it's it takes the humanity
whatever perspective you have around
money that takes the humanity out of the
person that's a prejudice
including that they're good or that
they're happy
and so I I think that's like the really
interesting way to look at your own
views around money what are the daily
judgments that you walk through
the world with and how is it separating
you from connection with yourself and
other people yeah I'm curious about some
of the things that that money stands in
for that we can have issues with like
Authority and with power how does that
happen yeah I can't say neurologically
exactly how it happens
um I can point to some of it but I can
say you know how I've seen it work in me
and so what I've noticed is that you get
emotional patterns that happen right so
what I mean by that is that when I had a
green Mohawk as a teenager my parents
worried 15 of the time and they worried
over things like me my haircut
if I was going to grow up right now my
parents are are you know kids are fine
everything like that and they still
worry about 15 of the time but now it's
over like are they going to burn the
chuck roast
so we seem to get into these emotional
patterns and as kids we get into very
specific emotional patterns and we're in
Theta brain wave which is kind of like
where you go in the subconscious it's
like how we program ourselves or
unprogram ourselves often is most
effective in Theta and so kids are
mostly in Theta from zero to seven zero
to eight years old and so they get into
a certain kind of emotional patterns and
then as they grow up they're going to
place those patterns on something
and probably have something of
equivalent importance in their life so
when dad leaves or Mom leaves or they
leave Mom and Dad then that pattern
needs to hit something else and money is
a great place for it to hit it's a great
place because it it can really you can
project anything you want onto money you
can think it's like we were talking
about it you can project it's great you
can project it's bad you can project
it's neutral you can project and and
there's evidence to show all of it you
can show how money
created a society in which more people
are able to thrive than any other
Society
and you can also look at how money
creates all the disenfranchisement
inside of our society so you can just
project anything you want onto money and
since it's such an important part of our
Lives it's so much about
determines so much for most people
how they spend their time
what they can do and what they can't do
in their mind that of course right so
Mom and Dad used to be that Mom and Dad
used to be the thing that said what I
could and couldn't do and now money is
now money is the thing that says what I
couldn't couldn't do and so it's just
natural for the emotional process to lay
itself on top of money so that that
emotional pattern could be about
anything and like you were saying
earlier it's often about love
um but you know in society and money is
just something that is so
present that it's really easy for it to
become about money yeah it's it's easy
for it to come about money and it I mean
it's just like it's easy for it to
become about your boss
like you see that all the time where
people aren't they think it's their boss
but it's not they're treating their boss
like their dad or their mom or a teacher
that had an impact on them right so how
does this show up in business I I have
sort of examples here in my life with
like not asking for what I needed like
not like feeling Shame about asking to
be paid
like more money for something and then
finding myself in the position of not
having my needs met enough to actually
do great work or not having the needs of
the project met enough for the project
to work out really really well because I
was afraid to ask for money and this has
happened yeah you know over the course
of my life in fractal ways
and so what's what's some other way that
you see this showing up commonly in
in business when people have this kind
of squirmish uh discomfort around money
well I see it happen in business in many
ways not even if they have squirmish
discomfort uh
you know I see people who think that
money is the way you determine if you
win or lose in business and to some
degree that's true right like if you
don't have enough Revenue you don't stay
in business so you lose if you if you
think of it that way
and but there's some people think the
most money wins right that that's the
currency for a good business is who made
the most money rather than maybe who had
the best impact or
um who has the happiest employees and so
you see people who create fights and
lose profit because they care about you
know how the deal came out
in a way of winning and losing instead
of in a way of winning and winning so
you see that happen all the time you see
people avoid marketing and sales whether
they're CEOs who are avoiding it or
employees that are avoided because sales
and marketing is dirty because you're
trying to convince somebody to do
something for money right yeah and then
you see other companies say
marketing is just education we're just
telling people we have a product that we
think is important and
and we want to give them an opportunity
to experience how important this product
can be in their lives and then that's a
different way of looking at at it and
some people get off on convincing people
to do things that aren't good for them
and they feel powerful over it and some
people just can't do that with their
lives you know it doesn't feel good in
their system or they realize that the
short-term power is not worth the
long-term disconnection with themselves
so I think there's all sorts of ways I
see CEOs who feel bad for asking for
money or they feel like they deserve
money both of them are going to not get
enough money probably for their own
for the needs of the company or yeah so
there's all sorts of ways of looking at
it seems like the people
in the Venture Capital business who seem
to do the best with money or
comparatively are people who see it as a
game
as a means to an end or a game
so a game meaning that it's like oh it's
like I don't take it personally and it
means to an end meaning my vision is to
you know plant 10 000 trees
and I just the money's the thing that I
have to do to get there and I think both
of those two things depersonalize the
money and then people who have
depersonalized the money are more
successful with it typically
there could also be a danger in that
because depending on what the game is
you know the game might just be a game
to maximize
money
for a particular you know Milestone like
let's just bring a company public
dump it on the public correct and then
walk away with the bags
and that could be a game that can have
really negative consequences oh correct
as is the other thing as is seeing the
you know having the money just be a
means to an end an end to what I think
it all has like a particular danger and
the good news is is that
all that's required is to not have the
money be personal
right so you don't actually have to see
it as a game you don't actually have to
see it as a means to an end all that's
really required is like oh the money
isn't personal
it's not a reflection of me it's not a
reflection of
who I am it's not a reflection of who
other people are you just have to see
yourself as human beyond the money
and then money as a way of flowing very
differently in people's lives I mean
there's there's a way that it that it
can be helpful that it's impersonal but
also there's a way that it always is
personal and I think something that
happens often is that people insist the
impersonality of it and then separate
themselves from the connection of the
people that they're working with yeah
right so the classic like you know it's
just business that basically is what
you're saying right yeah it's just
business like kind of avoidant yeah
that's that's totally personal that's
not taking it not personally that's
taking it incredibly personally at least
in the semantics that I'm in my head so
maybe I haven't explained it right in
fact I can be confident that I haven't
um
so saying it's just business means that
you have taken it personally you've
taken something personally you have some
level of shame or something to that
effect and you want to push that down
you want to push that emotional
experience down
just think of it this way there's you're
about to get fired and you have a choice
and the person who is about to fire you
can say it in many different ways one
way they can say it is
it's just business
all right we had to let you go it's just
business it's nothing personal which is
really personal because it's like I I
don't trust you to be able to handle by
telling you the real reason that I'm
firing you correct that's exciting yeah
perfectly sad right so just feel how
that would land and then you can have
like I feel really sorry that we
couldn't do it you know we wanted to and
we tried and we we weren't able to keep
you here there's that way of getting
fired right and then there's the
way of getting fired which is just like
Okay so this was our expectation of what
you were to do here we made that really
clear to you and those expectations
aren't being met my experiences is that
you're either capable of doing that the
stuff we've asked you to do in which
case you're you're choosing not to do it
which means you know on some level this
isn't the right job for you and you're
making sure that it doesn't last in your
world
or secondly you're not capable of doing
it and therefore you must always be
feeling like
I'm not doing a good enough job which
also isn't a really great thing for your
world so it's it's clearly not a match
and
like how do we move forward if this job
is a match how do we help you how do we
you know what what do you need so that
you can get to where you want to go in
your life next and how can we be of
service in that that's mutually
beneficial
that's another way to fire somebody
and to me that's the least personal of
those things
right it's like this is the situation
that that we find ourselves in yeah it's
the taking it the least personally
it's the least caretaking least avoidant
yeah the thing that we're avoiding is
that we actually feel bad for firing
them so we Harden ourselves down and
become [__] to fire somebody
which is is just a huge if you have to
harden yourself in any way if you have
to like become defensive build a wall
between you and other people you are
taking it personally that is a clear
sign that you are taking in personally
we somehow get in our head like if we
take it personally we're scared or we
feel guilty or we're sad but the the
clear sign of taking something
personally is that you have shut
yourself off to your own emotional
experience so bringing this back into
the the money aspect
the way that we show up in the world
with one another with all of our
Concepts and projections about money
you know there's many ways to take that
personally and there's many ways not to
there's there's ways that
we can be successful and then that will
make other people feel their shame
and there's ways that we can be
unsuccessful
by money standards
and people will still feel their shame
somehow or something else so that's
right your relationship with shame is
definitely gonna yeah exactly it's like
money is a projection money at some
level money is a projection
what if that were true for a moment what
if it were true that the money in your
life specifically to you the money in
your life is a projection
maybe it's a projection of your value
maybe it's a projection of your lack of
value maybe it's a projection of your
needs of your lack of Love of
what if it it was only that at the
beginning of the conversation I said I
don't really know what money is
and I think the thing that I'm pointing
to is when I take all the projections of
money away
it becomes something I can't name hmm
so when when I do that exercise there's
like okay letting letting go of money as
a projection then there's this thing
that immediately comes in where it's
like
like no it's not just that there's also
environmental factors there's you know
the privilege that I was born or not
born in there was the luck that I did or
didn't have in my you know in my career
in my business or in or even just in my
family relationship that patterned my
relationship that's underneath money
and so my question is how do you how do
you hold this sort of this like Cohen
where money is entirely projection so
that we can
let that projection fall away and find
out what's underneath it and love
ourselves more
and also hold the truth that
our entire relationship with money and
our experience with money has also been
influenced by external factors yeah I
mean this is the question of life it's
like how do we recognize the unity that
we are in the self-interest that moves
every one of our actions it's really the
question you're asking right if we even
that is a projection meaning
on some level if I really look at the
essence of of what I am
it's also very empty
very massive and very empty and at the
same time who I am is the person who is
driving a car and polluting the
atmosphere
and the person who I am is the person
who is
hurting somebody with the hamburger that
I just bought so it's like this
unbelievable Cohen
on one level this unbelievable Cohen of
both like
human side and this illusionary side
coming together this material side of
money in the illusionary side of money
coming together
and how do you handle it and the answer
that I have found that creates the most
freedom in me is is with Integrity you
know and
and when I say Integrity I mean
when I listen to my deep truth
when I am spending money or when I'm
receiving money what does that require
of me what do I have to do to feel most
aligned around my behavior with money
that's the question that I ask
and it doesn't feel aligned to be to
have no money and it doesn't feel
aligned to accumulate wealth for the
sake of accumulating wealth
and it doesn't feel aligned to have me
say like to try to use my money to save
people
just like it doesn't feel aligned for me
to use my money to earn my non-money my
anything to try to save somebody but it
feels
really important for me to use my money
to work with people for our mutual
Freedom Our Mutual Saving
so it's this really interesting thing
where
it's like this moment-to-moment learning
for me around money where it's
how does it feel right now what does
this transaction feel like
how does having a transaction feel as
compared to being in connection and
letting the money sort itself
this is the way that I think about how I
want to live with money at this point
yeah thanks a lot for that yeah I notice
I'm nervous that um that people won't
get to it you know because there's I
realize as we're talking about money
there's so many
um really it's like religion you know
what I mean like there's no conversation
you can have about religion where you're
probably not going to offend somebody
yeah I think it's the same way around
money I don't think that there's really
a way for us to talk about the money
where somebody isn't going to feel like
either
we have poverty mentality or that we're
part of the oppressive class or
you know like and I think this is why
people don't talk about money this is
why we don't talk about our credit card
debt it's why
any conversation that's happening in the
world around money is like how to make
it or what's wrong with it
there's no conversation of like what is
it
there's no conversation of what's the
relationship we want with it
there's a little bit of a conversation
right now with like electronic
currencies of like what are the rules to
it but I mean this is the perfect
example you know if you create a
currency out there that has rules of
money that don't have shortage of Supply
as a part of that rule nobody has faith
in the currency
so is it the money's problem or is it
what we put our faith into that is the
problem
humans
naturally put their faith into things
that have short supply that they can
hold on to
that have power immediate power that's
where humans naturally put their faith
for a good reason you know like a spear
is a good thing to put your faith in if
you're a hunter
and it fulfills all those requirements
and you're hunting a you know limited
supply of game exactly and there's if
you're making your own Spears there's
somewhat of a limited you know it
requires effort because there's a limit
of Supply there's not just like Spears
growing off trees yet there's effort
involved
and this is what we put our faith in so
if it's not money
and we put our faith in something else
if it's not the US dollar if it's not
the Euro and we put our faith in
something else like Bitcoin the question
is what are we putting our faith in
and if we ask ourselves deeply like am I
willing to put my faith in something
that has abundance that isn't Limited
that anybody can have at all
and that doesn't have short-term power
and I'm going to rest my entire family's
security
on the faith in this thing like the way
we do with money
how does that feel
money isn't the issue
at the core the core issue is that
like if if every human being on the
planet put their faith in something that
was an utter abundance
and there was like clear that oh we have
enough for everybody
and that I can give freely
I can have faith in long-term investment
like if we all had that like what would
happen to the problems of our world and
that's a really difficult thing to ask
and what would that be I have no idea I
have no idea but it's a difficult thing
even to ask you and I in this moment and
it sounds like one thing that could be
is investing in relationships investing
in trust which is what communities
without money have right it's what they
do
right I remember when I was young I was
in my 20s I worked in the Hayes Valley
projects and Head Start and I realized
and then if I went from that into
International stock Lending and I
remember you saying like
one has money one has community
one relies on money for survival and one
relies on community for survival one
rely generally relies on money for
happiness one generally relies on
community for happiness which we're more
successful
depends on how you measure success
you know but what I noticed is what I
noticed is the people with the community
wanted the money and the people with the
money
didn't always want the community
sometimes the community was heavy for
them
right because whatever they were taught
but both of them had poverty in in one
way or another So speaking of poverty
I've heard you say this a couple of
times in some of the courses as well
using the term poverty mentality
and you were just saying earlier about
like feeling a little bit of fear in
your system about how you know this
talking about money is like talking
about religion and everybody's gonna be
offended about something I have a
something about this word the poverty
mentality that
all right that offends you well it's
it's not even so much that it offends me
personally but I I think that it might
offend a lot of people because it maybe
associate like poverty mentality is a
thing that keeps you from having money
then poverty mentality is like this
thing that's holding you back and that's
associated with poverty which is
something that people are born into
um and don't have a choice of starting
there I'm curious if like if it's
poverty or if it's like a scarcity
mindset yeah yeah that's a great
question so for me poverty mentality
doesn't mean anything about money you
know I was born with a poverty mentality
but the poverty wasn't around cash
though there was some of that as well
um there the poverty was around love and
the poverty was around attention
that there were I wasn't going to get
enough attention I wasn't going to get
enough love and so I grew into a life
where I
created a world where I didn't get
enough love and I didn't get enough
attention
and it took a lot of work to switch that
that autopilot off in my life and in my
system
so that's what I'm speaking to about
poverty mentality it's the false belief
that we can't get what we need and what
we want
generally not specifically we're not
going to ever get everything we want but
like that we can't have our needs met
but yeah just living living and
recreating that in
whatever way whether it's about money or
anything else correct that's what I'm
speaking to and I can see your point
that like just the word poverty could
trigger and it could speak to you know a
class of people that didn't have a
choice or a group of people who didn't
have a choice around their financial
situation
but I I don't like the the term that you
used I don't like using it for a
different reason you know which is
scarcity mindset
because it it feels ungrounded it
doesn't feel like it's as pertinent or
real to me as the word poverty
but I can see how
that also is a is a bias yeah yeah well
maybe we'll find a better word someday
yeah yeah I mean yeah there's a flip
side to every coin all right well thank
you Joe this has been a really great
episode and I think we could do a couple
more on money related topics yeah but
for now this is yeah this is great
awesome thank you so much for your time
thank you take care bye
thanks for listening to the art of
accomplishment if you enjoyed what you
heard today please subscribe and rate US
on your podcast app we'd love your
feedback so feel free to send us
questions or comments you can reach out
to us join our newsletter or check out
our courses at Art of accomplishment.com
[Music]